well hi everybody this talks a little
bit different it's about the
possibilities that in the ancient past a
number of uh giant impact events may
have occurred on earth and led to
considerable destruction and some of
this is based on sort of ancient legends
and myths
so we'll see as we go along
the first one that i'm going to talk
about is an event that
seems to have affected a city called tel
el jamaan
in uh the ancient uh
rift valley north of
the dead sea in the jordan valley out
there in
the middle east
and the first evidence that uh this city
existed came from uh the copper age the
chalcolithic
4300 bce
and there are remains of the
site there which show that
uh about
1300 years later the city was wiped out
and abandoned uh and left abandoned for
about 600 years and that latter point is
quite important to the story
so we've got a picture here showing the
location just north of the dead sea here
and
the site as it is today the dead sea in
the background and the temple and the
palace and so forth
what's left now
is these ruins with the walls
and they seem to have been sheared off
level uh fairly comprehensively
and then at the top here we've got a
sort of reconstruction of what things
might have been like um when the city
was in its heyday
now the archaeological evidence shows
several rounds of destruction that seem
to have occurred
um so it's not necessarily that there
has been a single uh event of the city
being built and then destroyed in fact
we've got a couple of uh instances from
and 3300 bce
of earthquake damage
and the thing with earthquake damage is
you see a lot of the buildings fall down
uh but there's evidence that the uh
inhabitants almost immediately rebuild
and carry on putting the city back
together without any interruption
and then we've got two later events
marked on the picture here the middle
bronze age event at 1650 bce and at 1400
bce the late bronze age event
and when you look at them they actually
the archaeological evidence is quite
different
the
one that we're going to focus on is the
1650 bce middle bronze age event down
here
and
this is strange because
it seems to have got a charcoal there
which marks a fire the burning of the
city
so a city-wide conflagration
but then the city
wasn't rebuilt the destruction and the
layers above it show that it was
abandoned for that period of 600 years
or so
and what's interesting is that there are
15 other smaller cities and about 100
villages in and around the same area
that seem to have been abandoned at the
same time
now when you dig into the the
destruction layer what you find is lots
of shards of pottery
and within the pottery
there are embedded grains that appear to
have
been formed at very high temperatures
and we're talking 2000 degrees c
even including nano diamonds small
chunks of carbon that have been
compressed and heated and under enormous
heat and pressure
they take up the diamond
like crystal structure so we've got a
few electron micrographs of these uh
embedded uh grains where they've
impacted into a piece of pottery and
stuck themselves into a small crater so
they were obviously blasted at high
speed
to be able to embed themselves in the
crater and that doesn't really just
point to an ordinary fire
and here's a number of micrograms of
some of the nano diamonds these little
tiny grains of diamonds that it really
indicate a very high pressure
environment
um and we do see these nano diamonds at
other events uh one is the 66 million
year ago
uh kt boundary the end cretaceous
uh boundary where the dinosaurs were
wiped out and of course in that case
we're very confident that it was
associated with the impact of a very
large asteroid smashing into the
yucatan peninsula at chixolube creating
the huge 200 kilometer wide crater
and the shockwave then resulted in a lot
of this nanodiamond formation
um and another instance where we find
these nanodiamonds which we'll come to
later is um at about 13 000 years ago um
at the boundary of what's called the
younger dry ass period where we'll talk
about that separately
but in addition to all of these grains
you also notice when you look at the
shards of pottery that they've been
knocked over in one direction
they seem to have all been blasted
from the base
and have their upper layers thrown off
in one direction off to the right in
this picture where the arrows are
indicating it and this is uh consistent
with a sort of south west to northeast
orientation
across the site it's not just happened
in one location but at the palace the
gate the temple and down by the outer
ring road here they've uh all pointing
in the same direction indicating that a
very strong blast wave came across the
site uh from this
south
uh just off south direction
here's again some of the grains from
pottery in the palace
showing the molten glass uh that has
been embedded in the potteries and again
analysis of this shows it's been
subjected to temperatures of 2000
degrees
we also see the crystal structure in a
lot of the rocks
showing these
fractures this shocked quartz effect
where there are
um
the crystals have actually been cracked
by the enormous hammer impact of this uh
shock wave again this only occurs where
we see
meteor impacts we don't see this in uh
other types of uh catastrophe we just
don't generate the the pressure
even the human remains are scattered and
pulverized and
show evidence of that 2000 degree
flash burning on the outside so quite a
violent event indeed
not only that there is huge areas of the
land that uh when you look at the 1650
layer you find it's full of salt
and this suggests that salt water was
spread all over the land by this event
salting down the soil which would of
course prevented crops growing and may
well explain the fact that the
whole place was abandoned for about 600
years
waiting really for the soil to recover
and for it to retain the ability to
start growing crops again this map marks
the the city in question here in this
big red dot some of these other
smaller blue dots are the lesser
settlements there's another
moderate-sized city here town nimrin
which also suffered and over here we
have the city of jericho we'll come to
that in a moment
so people have speculated about the
cause and about many different possible
causes of this sort of event
uh an accidental fire burning the whole
city down well
that such things do happen
but
um
and there was a lot of pottery making
going on so maybe a kiln got out of
control but the fires from such a a
city-wide burning event would really
only reach about a thousand degrees
and it just doesn't account for all of
the
shock waves or indeed the
heavy metals that are found in some of
the chemistry in the layer
people have talked about the possibility
that it was destroyed as a result of a
war well in those days the main weapons
of war were bows and arrows and slings
and there are no arrowheads or
slingstones found littering the the site
in that layer whereas there are in other
layers that show
uh the those were the result of
war-based destruction
um
and uh
so this doesn't look like it was the
result of a war
it could have been an earthquake perhaps
is one possibility
it is after all a fault zone the whole
rift valley is the consequence of a
great fault
but this doesn't explain the temperature
or shock wave effects
likewise volcanoes erupting well we
don't know of any in that area um and
there's no signs of things like the lava
and pumice stones and ash and nor could
a volcano really generate the
temperature although it could get to
1600 degrees c that's still not enough
to account for the uh the temperature
shown by some of the melts and the
globules of
projectile
um
glass that were found
um and they don't generate the shock
overpressure to cause the
shocked quartz effect in the crystals
either
some people have said well what about
lightning that can generate temperatures
of 4000 degrees and it can generate
shock but it would also leave a magnetic
signature in the rocks which has never
been found
and lightning would be too localized to
hit all of those cities
and surrounding areas all at once and
can't explain really the salt
that's present all over the uh the land
area
well of course
we do have an eyewitness
account of an event
from uh the genesis
um chapter in the bible
talking about the destruction of a city
in the dead sea area and of course we're
talking about the cities of sodom and
gomorrah here and
the eyewitness accounts of this talk of
stones falling from the sky fire from
the sky thick smoke the city being
devastated and the crops being destroyed
all of which is consistent with uh this
location
and the fact that this might have been
either an impact or an air burst of a
meteorite
coming into the atmosphere and exploding
high in the atmosphere causing a huge
fireball and shockwave
and that's what happened uh in 1908 in
the tunguska event
up in siberia uh an airburst of a 60
meter
meteor 60 meter diameter stony iron
meteorite that came diving into the
atmosphere
blew up
high up in the uh the sky
with the equivalent power of a 20
megaton hydrogen bomb
that made a fireball a kilometer in
diameter and raised that the temperature
in the fireball to 300 000 degrees
centigrade
uh but that was in the sky and the
temperature on the ground reached over
2000 degrees and created a thousand
kilometer per second blast waves and
what we've done in the map here on the
right is overlaid the sort of butterfly
uh
explosion pattern of the tunguska air
air burst where it uh wiped out large
areas of forest
in siberia
over the area around
these cities in the valley here um
tao l hallan on the right and jericho on
the left there
being on the edge of the blast uh radius
of such an event
now this is a simulation of with a
computer of what would happen with an
air burst like this the object blows up
high in the atmosphere
but the tremendous momentum of the
incoming object means the superheated
plume of gas carries on downwards
punching its way through the atmosphere
and cooling but still reaches the ground
with this super heated uh plume of gas
and fragments and creates an enormous uh
shock wave blast on the ground
um and so this is the sort of
thing that we think may have happened
in 1650 bce
another piece of evidence for this is
that there are uh evidence of uh metals
and particular
metals like platinum and palladium
that are occurring in the uh
materials from this time
and these are the
charts showing the amount of platinum
and palladium from the different sites
at the different layers you can see a
huge spike in the uh graph there
corresponding to the time of the impact
so
these minerals are very common these
heavy metals are
quite often found in meteors
and
not very common in the rest of the
earth's crust so it's a bit of a
signature of an asteroid implant
now i mentioned jericho off to the
left-hand side of the
valley this has been identified with the
city also known as the site tell as
sultan
that's believed to be the site of the
biblical jericho
it was a very prosperous uh third
largest city in the valley with these
well-known state-of-the-art defenses
with very thick walls
and by 1650 bce it had grown to its
maximum extent
and then something very bad happened
has been dated to 1653 plus or minus 18
years and that's entirely consistent
with the dating of the other events uh
evidence that we've looked at
and there's talk in the reports of the
city suffering a
violent destruction and fire the walls
being blackened or reddened
every room filled with broken brickwork
timber household utensils
and the debris
suffered very badly from fire
and of course the story of the walls
falling
and when we look at the site what we
find is that there is indeed a white ash
indicating a very high temperature we
have pottery fragments
um that were not uh fully melted and not
melted as much as at the uh the primary
site at tel alhaman
so the temperature was a little lower a
little bit further away from ground zero
for this air burst
um
but there are many many fragments of
pottery and skeletons indicating that
the blast wave had arrived and the walls
all appear to have been knocked down and
then burnt rather than
burnt and then fallen over
so
the destruction of jericho reported in
a lot of the uh biblical stories
is fairly consistent with this
people talk about destruction by
earthquakes or warfare but again there
is no evidence of either an earthquake
or the characteristics of a war with the
artifacts that you would expect there
and
likewise jericho was abandoned rather
than being rebuilt straight away which
is normally what happens after an
earthquake or a battle
so it's highly likely that this these
two had a common cause and uh jericho
just 22 kilometers to the west
uh would have certainly
suffered a huge overpressure blast wave
uh that would easily have knocked the
walls down and set things on fire
the tunduska event caused fires over a
radius of 20 kilometers so it's entirely
possible that the biblical stories of
jericho are actually associated with
this same event
um it's a huge destruction from the
skies
of course
it's very difficult to be certain about
these things and some of this is a
little bit speculative and some people
have disputed it but there's quite a lot
of evidence and enough i think to
convince me that it's worth taking these
ideas very seriously
and with that i'll bring this one to a
close